# The etiquette of the true gentleman — Toscano Cigars

- Source: https://www.toscanocigars.com/lifestyle/fashion/the-etiquette-of-the-true-gentleman/
- Accessed: 2026-07-16

 The etiquette of the true gentleman | TOSCANO® CIGARS Master Aged Our history The History The cigar rollers The supply chain Factory visits Smokers guide Pills pairings Cigars TOSCANO® Lifestyle Where to buy The etiquette of the true gentleman Favourite content Save content lifestyle How to behave impeccably and know what to do in every situation, among friends, during a dinner, on the street or on the most important occasions One day, Lloyd George , British prime minister between 1916 and 1922, was asked to give a definition of a &lsquo;true gentleman &rsquo; . The statesman replied, &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a man who takes his sugar with tongs even when he&rsquo;s alone!&rdquo; Good manners, in short, are not a dress that one puts on when in company, but a way of being that permeates one&rsquo;s whole existence, in every context. Even for those lucky enough to receive a good education in the family it may be useful to review some rules. We are talking about rules of good manners that a gentleman smoker cannot ignore and that must be updated with the passage of time. Habits change, lifestyles change, and our behaviour must also be in line with the times. Think of mobile phones: only 30 years ago, it was not necessary to remember to switch them off before coming to the table. David Llyod George Smoking a cigar in company Although many gentlemen smoke cigars, unfortunately not all smokers (cigar or not) are true gentlemen. It is therefore worth summarizing the four basic rules never to forget on social occasions. They may seem trivial, but are often disregarded by discourteous smokers. Are cigars a real passion for you? Well, remember that it is not the same for everyone. Always ask permission to smoke, even in the open. When, to the fateful question, &ldquo;Do you mind if I smoke?&rdquo; someone answers, &ldquo;Yes&rdquo;, accept the answer without asking for explanations. It is a small sacrifice perhaps, but certainly a gesture of true elegance. If you are at a friend&rsquo;s house, and you really want to smoke, ask for permission to do it outside. And remember to use an ashtray. Even if the householder shares the same passion with you, wait for him or her to suggest smoking indoors. If it is your house, do not think that it is fine to smoke without asking permission. Indeed, even more so at home, the guests are sacred and you should make sure that they do not feel uncomfortable. A true gentleman shares his passion with his friends. When the moment comes to light your cigar, make sure that there is a small stock to offer the company. A few rules for a special moment At last, it is time to light your cigar with good friends. It is the perfect time to have a chat or maybe simply to share this pleasure silently. The gentleman smoker distinguishes himself also in this case: the cigar, in fact, must be respected and honoured with the right rituals. As far as possible, avoid cutting the cigar with standard scissors or a knife. Always carry with you a pocket cigar cutter. Light the cigar with a butane lighter or wooden matches whose odours do not alter the cigar&rsquo;s taste. If your companions in adventure do not have anything with which to light up, offer them your matches or your lighter, but as long as they are not alight. Lighting a cigar is a personal matter. To remove the ash, do not tap the cigar as you do with cigarettes. Wait until enough has formed (if it is of good quality wait for a couple of centimetres). Then, gently rotate the cigar on the bottom of the ashtray. At the end of your smoke, allow the cigar to go out by itself in the ashtray. If you would like to re-light it &ndash;and there are several schools of thought on this practice&ndash; blow the smoke away before putting it down and the flavour should not alter. If your friends do not follow these basic rules, as true gentleman as you are, do not let them know. Your impeccable way of approaching this pleasure will certainly be a good example for those who still lack experience. The eternal allure of Borsalino (Previous article) A loyal and silent companion (Next article) Related Content --> LIFESTYLE &AMP; CULTURE The great Italians who made History A homage to our country’s history and best tradition: art, style, culture, courage and creativity are the typical values of being Italian. Bringing together the charismatic personalities and typical rituals of our Peninsula, we narrate the Italian spirit and its most meaningful nuances LIFESTYLE &AMP; CULTURE The eternal allure of Borsalino Humphrey Bogart, Harrison Ford, Alain Delon, Robert Redford, all the way down to Mad Men’s Don Draper: for over two centuries, the Borsalino hat has been a priceless accessory for the most stylish and elegant of men. The history of this legendary hat began in Alessandria, Piedmont, in the 1800s, with Giuseppe Borsalino – nicknamed “u siur Pipen” – and went on to become a world-famous brand synonymous with style &copy; 2026 Club Amici del Toscano® Manifatture Sigaro Toscano S.r.l. Head Office: Piazza delle Muse, 8 - 00197 Rome, Italy Fiscal Code and Business Register of ROME 09037861003 - R.E.A. RM 1134841 Capital paid and effective from the last balance 10.000.000,00 Euro Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie For more info or if you wish unsubscribe from toscanocigars.com newsletter please contact [email&#160;protected] Master Aged Our history The History The cigar rollers The supply chain Factory visits Smokers guide Pills pairings Cigars TOSCANO® Lifestyle Where to buy Shop Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie This content is reserved for an adult public Please, enter your date of birth: By accessing, browsing or otherwise using this website I agree with the Terms & Conditions and the Privacy Policy Do you want to view this content? Just log in to the Club Amici del Toscano! Enter your credentials to browse the entire site: I forgot my username and / or password If you don't have an account, register for free : it takes a maximum of 2 minutes. Unlimited access to content Store locator Exclusive events By accessing, browsing or otherwise using this website I agree with the Terms & Conditions and the Privacy Policy Close This content is reserved for an adult public Please, enter your date of birth: By accessing, browsing or otherwise using this website I agree with the Terms & Conditions and the Privacy Policy 
